---
layout: post
title: "Eichmann in Gilead"
author: "Tino Trangia"
tags: essays
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

>This essay was written and submitted as a course requirement for English R1B. It is an analysis of the dystopian world and villains of The Handmaid's Tale through the lense of Hannah Arendt.<!--more-->

“The longer one listened to him, the more obvious it became that his inability to speak was closely connected with an inability to think, namely, to think from the standpoint of somebody else” (Arendt 27). So said Hannah Arendt in her book titled _Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil_ in reference to Adolf Eichmann, who stood trial as a major coordinator of the Holocaust. A German-born political theorist, Arendt’s analysis of the Eichmann trial and her philosophy surrounding the “banality of evil” is reflected in _The Handmaid’s Tale_ by Margaret Atwood. In her novel, Atwood depicts a theocratic, patriarchal, and totalitarian regime that appears to rely on religious ideology, propaganda, and fear to maintain control over its population. Atwood’s Republic of Gilead is by no means a banal society, but if stripped of its religious façade, its seemingly outlandish power structure becomes disturbingly plausible. Through her depiction of the setting and its inhabitants, Atwood reveals that complicity and complacency within Gilead’s oppressive state do not originate from fanaticism, but from selfishness, herd mentality, and apathy &mdash; or, as Arendt defines it, the products of “thoughtlessness.” Despite instances of corruption and dissent from Gilead’s national ideology, individuals in the novel continue to accept and solidify the new status quo. The answer to Gilead’s stability lies within Eichmann, who may be “just as ordinary as Atwood’s Commander,” according to Mihaela Frunza and Iulia Grad in “Who Is the Meanest of Them All” (Frunza and Grad 1). In their article, Frunza and Grad highlight that “nobody has the monopoly on evil” within Gilead, and that each character is “too banal” to emerge as the primary antagonist (Frunza and Grad 2). Using archetypes, one can conclude that there is not a clear “Hitler” in The Handmaid’s Tale; however, there are many “Eichmanns.” 

Before delving into characters, it is important to recognize the bureaucratic system that is responsible for initiating and perpetuating Gilead’s oppressive regime. Gilead is built upon what is deemed to be necessity, rather than what is ideologically consistent. When discussing the state of society before Gilead, the Commander claims that “the main problem was with the men … there was nothing for them to do” (Atwood 190). This attempt to justify Gilead’s inception provides insight into Gilead’s design. As revealed in the historical note, the Commander is one of the primary architects of this dystopian society (Atwood 270). By devising a strict patriarchy, the Commander and the Sons of Jacob exploited the desire for purpose, attempting to create a sense of fulfillment by redefining the societal status of men. As Arendt notes, “what stuck in the minds of these men who had become murderers was simply the notion of being involved in something historic, grandiose, and unique” (Arendt 52). A greater cause allows followers of an oppressive movement to invert their thinking; they begin viewing any crimes they commit as personal burdens and saying, “what horrible things I had to watch in the pursuance of my duties” (Arendt 52). In essence, the people responsible for maintaining Gilead’s regime have suppressed their empathy by turning attention to themselves. As a result, complicit actors do not contemplate the impact of their atrocities but rationalize them as unavoidable necessities. Instead of being driven by a devotion to Gilead’s ideology, they are driven by a sense of duty. Through bureaucracy, “totalitarian regimes construct a web of guilty complicities among all actors,” resulting in a system where “everybody mechanically follows orders” (Frunza and Grad 3). Like Eichmann, who claimed that he “would have had a bad conscience” if he had not executed his bureaucratic duties, characters in the novel find self-worth by fulfilling the role that Gilead has defined. They not only fail to think from the perspective of others but fail to think for themselves. 

Although extremely ideological, Gilead is still grounded by necessity. The Commander does not question the existence of Jezebel’s, despite the stark contradiction with Gilead’s religious tenants. He views it as a “good place to meet people … you can hardly do business without it” (Atwood 215). Jezebel’s is not only tolerated as an exception to religious doctrine but seen as an economic necessity in a sex-deprived society. Another divergence from the Gilead’s fundamentalist society is the ubiquity of Soul Scrolls: A franchise in every city that “must make a lot of profit,” according to Offred (Atwood 153). These stores are filled with machines that continuously print prayers, which are often phone-ordered by Wives. Even in a society where piety and religious devotion are paramount, the act of prayer is commercialized and industrialized with ruthless efficiency. Offred mentions that the store used to sell lingerie before it was replaced (Atwood 153). At face value, this appears to be a juxtaposition between the sacred and the sacrilegious; however, both stores are products of an industrialized, consumerist economy. In a nation that embodies religious idealism, the Soul Scrolls stand out as materialistic, if not secular in their function &mdash; to profit from a society in which piety is a necessity. Capitalist undertones are also found in the term “Aunt,” which was “derived from commercial products available to women” before Gilead’s inception (Atwood 271). Thus, while Gilead’s theocratic veneer is often used to justify oppression, there was a need to “sell” the new society through familiar branding. Like the bureaucracy of the Nazi regime, which sought to extract money from affluent members of the Jewish population to fund mass deportations, Gilead’s founders privatized the “Jewish repatriation scheme,” unable to avoid economic necessity. (Arendt 25; Atwood 270). Just as Eichmann orchestrated the Holocaust from behind a nationalist ideology, the leaders of Gilead orchestrate a complicit and complacent society by using religion as an instrument of the state. Neither party required fanaticism to carry out their actions. Instead, they simply viewed atrocities as another part of their job description, thoughtlessly performing what seemed to be necessary tasks.

Gilead’s bureaucracy exploits both selfishness and herd mentality, two ideas that may seem contradictory but are not mutually exclusive. The former allows people like the Commander to distance themselves from the harm that they cause and drives people like Offred to remain complacent out of self-preservation. The latter elicits complicity from the masses by taking advantage of perceived commonalities. The power of herd mentality is demonstrated during the Particicution, when a group of handmaids publicly execute an alleged rapist (Atwood 249). Whether the man is guilty or not was irrelevant, because the handmaids were enraged by a common enemy. Gilead takes advantage of the inability to think for oneself by turning the handmaids into complicit actors &mdash; unthinking executioners for the regime. This is not to be mistaken for solidarity, however. In fact, the Aunts are openly complicit in the subjugation of other women. Turning members of an oppressed population against one another is not an original concept. “Without Jewish help in administrative and police work … there would have been either complete chaos or an impossibly severe drain on German manpower” (Arendt 57). Like the Jewish leaders who were given “enormous powers,” and, like Eichmann, the Aunts were complicit because they viewed it as beneficial to their own interests (Arendt 57). The selfish desire to retain what little power they have causes the Aunts to turn against their own sex, adopting the duty of indoctrinating the handmaids. Their apparent zeal is both a requirement of their position in the bureaucratic system and a way to reconcile their role in upholding an oppressive patriarchy. It can be easier to thoughtlessly promote an ideology and to share institutional blame than to admit that one acted out of personal interest. By surrendering the capacity to think for themselves, the Aunts circumvent the need to think about their complicit actions. Thus, Gilead’s bureaucracy exploits the selfish desire for advancement and safety, while also rewarding thoughtlessness and conformity within the herd. 

The Commander, out of all the characters in _The Handmaid’s Tale_, is the most apparent reflection of Eichmann. Frunza and Grad note that Offred tends to describe the Commander as “‘sheepish”’ and “almost sweet, shyly asking Offred to kiss him ‘as if it were for real’” (Frunza and Grad 1). Although the Commander is responsible for Gilead’s inception, Offred fails to note any remarkable traits about him. Like Eichmann, who “was neither stupid, nor a lunatic, and not even malefic,” the Commander does not appear more zealous or patriarchal than most characters in the novel (Frunza and Grad 1). This embodies what Arendt describes as “the trouble with Eichmann”: The fact that “so many were like him, and that the many were neither perverted nor sadistic, that they were … terrifyingly normal” (Arendt 129). Both Eichmann and the Commander demonstrate that evil does not require a unique psychology, rather it merely requires thoughtlessness. To clarify, this does not mean that the two men were not aware of their actions. Eichmann undoubtedly housed anti-Semitic beliefs and expressed pride for his accomplishments in the Nazi party. Similarly, the Commander admits to Offred that “better never means better for everyone … it always means worse, for some” (Atwood 191). The thoughtlessness lies in the lack of empathy, or the inability to imagine life from the viewpoint of their victims. Arendt states that the “lesson” that Eichmann’s trial taught was that “such remoteness from reality and such thoughtlessness can wreak more havoc than all the evil instincts taken together which, perhaps, are inherent in man” (Arendt 134). The Commander is clearly distanced from the reality that his victims face. He, a man responsible for the systematic suppression of sexual and emotional desires, claims that ‘“you can’t cheat Nature,’” while speaking to Offred, a primary victim of said suppression (Atwood 214). The Commander provides no indication that he grasps the irony of this statement, similar to how Eichmann openly ranted about his lack of promotion within the ranks of the S.S &mdash; while talking to a German Jew who was interrogating him (Arendt 134). Furthermore, the Commander often uses clichés to justify himself, such as “you can’t make an omelette without breaking eggs” (Atwood 190). Likewise, Eichmann relied on clichés and stock phrases that “had nothing to do with the reality of the situation” when defending himself, because he had no original thoughts regarding his actions (Arendt 64). The Commander simply realizes no error in his actions and is unable, or unwilling, to imagine the world from Offred’s perspective; to do so would require envisioning a world where his actions are unjust. Focused on engineering a solution for mass deportation, Eichmann was ignorant of anything “not directly, technically and bureaucratically, connected with his job,” much in the way that the Commander’s role as an architect of Gilead makes him blind to Offred’s suffering (Arendt 29). The self-centered Commander is not stupid, nor is he narcissistic. He is unable to see Offred as a true individual because he is 
woefully unaware of her viewpoint. His dehumanization of others is founded on thoughtlessness, rather than ideology. 
	
Offred is more difficult to compare to Eichmann, which is perhaps why Frunza and Grad gloss over her complacency in their article and focus on her victim status instead. Despite Offred’s demonstration of thought in her narration &mdash; she is clearly aware of Gilead’s atrocities and even contemplates resistance &mdash; the banality of evil remains relevant to her character. From beginning to end, Offred plays the role of an observer and is always responding to the actions of others. Her story is itself banal. In the last moments, Offred realizes that she had been “wasting her time,” because she contemplated action throughout the novel, but never acted (Atwood 261). In the end, Offred simply enters the van, unsure of her fate. She consistently fails to think for herself when it matters. During the rise of Gilead, Offred accepted Luke’s claim that going on marches “would be futile” (Atwood 165). When Ofglen offers her a way out, Offred refuses, believing that she “had made a life for [herself]” in Gilead (Atwood 242). While these instances of thoughtlessness are like Eichmann’s, a better parallel is discussed in the novel: The mistress of a death camp guard who claimed that “he was not a monster” (Atwood 135).  Offred recalls that the mistress was “thinking about how not to think,” and realizes that it was easy to “invent a humanity, for anyone at all” (Atwood 135). Nevertheless, Offred projects humanity onto the Commander by noting his sadness after an unsatisfying kiss and believing that he had “delicate” motivations after Moira suspects that he is using her as a ‘“power trip’” (Atwood 220). Like the mistress, Offred’s attitude toward the Commander is clouded by her intimacy, which prevents her from distinguishing his personality from his actions. Arendt notes that multiple psychiatrists certified Eichmann as “normal,” and one even called his “attitude toward his wife and children … ‘desirable’” (Arendt 16). The Commander is a similarly unremarkable individual; therefore, it may be unfair to blame Offred for normalizing him as a human. In contrast, Eichmann’s judges were hesitant to accept that he was not a “monster”, unwilling to “admit that an average … person … could be perfectly incapable of telling right from wrong” (Arendt 17). However, both Offred and the judges fall victim to the same fallacy: That evil and normalcy are mutually exclusive traits. By failing to recognize the banality of evil, Offred becomes complicit and refrains from action. Finally, both Offred and Eichmann failed to recognize that “in politics obedience and support are the same,” a phrase that Frunza and Grad apply to the Commander, but not to apply to Offred (Arendt 130). 

It is convenient to view people like Eichmann as monsters, just as it is convenient to view Gilead and its leaders as an unthinkable outcome. Applying Arendt’s _Eichmann in Jerusalem_ to Atwood’s _The Handmaid’s Tale_ reveals that the Republic of Gilead maintains itself on the principle of thoughtlessness, which manifests itself as complicity, complacency, and self-interest. The disturbing result is that a sadistic nature is not a requirement for causing systematic oppression, nor is it a requirement for the acceptance and normalization of that oppression. Offred’s character reveals, however, that complicity can arise from a different perspective &mdash; that of a bystander. Together, Arendt and Atwood illustrate the dangers of thoughtlessness, as well as the dangers of attempting to isolate evil and banality.

### Works Cited
* Arendt, Hannah. _Eichmann in Jerusalem_. New York: The Viking Press, 1964.
* Atwood, Margaret. _The Handmaid's Tale_. McClelland and Steward, 1985.
* Frunza, Mihaela and Iulia Grad. "Who Is the Meanest of Them All?" Robison-Greene, Rachel. _The Handmaid’s Tale and Philosophy : A Womb of One’s Own_. Open Court, 2019. Chapter 16. EBSCOhost, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=nlebk&AN=1920589&site=eds-live.