---
layout: post
title: "Smart Does Not Mean Better: Why Big Data Will Not Solve Urban Issues"
author: "Tino Trangia"
tags: opinion
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Singapore, London, Songdo, Toronto, and San Francisco. All around the globe, cities are striving to become smarter, to make use of technology and entrepreneurship as tools for advancement. Administrators, planners, and corporations envision a built environment that is saturated with data-centric systems. In these so-called “smart cities,” Big Data promises to inform urban planning through ubiquitous data collection and automated decision making. <!--more-->

Ostensibly, an interconnected network of sensors, apps, and algorithms work together to provide benefits such as increased quality of life, decreased expenditures, lower crime rates, reduced traffic, and increased sustainability. These networks vary in depth and scale, from city-wide monitoring systems to community-specific revitalization projects. Proponents of the smart city concept often argue that objective data will make city management more rational and efficient. On the other hand, critics point out ethical concerns such as privacy, racial biases, and economic inequity. 

The ethical issues related to data-centric urban planning are legitimate and certainly warrant further investigation. For example, does predictive policing disproportionately harm certain communities? Facial recognition technology and increased camera coverage in minority neighborhoods point toward “yes,” as reported by the MIT Technology Review. However, there is a more fundamental issue at stake that is not as commonly discussed – the narrative of the smart city itself. We, as students and engineers, must not only address the ethical consequences of data-centric systems but also discuss why such systems are an inherently problematic approach to solving socio-economic issues. 

To begin, it is important to view the smart city as a sociotechnical imaginary – a collectively held, institutionally stabilized conceptualization of the future – that is largely based on the visions of governments and corporations. It is an imaginary that finds its roots in high modernism, a philosophy that has driven many urban planning initiatives since the mid-20th century. High modernism is characterized by the reliance on science and technology to rationally organize society and improve the human condition. Past applications of high modernism can inform us about the future of our smart cities.
Jérémie Sanchez, in an article analyzing urban sanitation in Myanmar, states that incomplete and fabricated data, combined with a failure to render living conditions legible, resulted in a “blinded” government. Attempts to improve sanitation in the city of Mandalay were impeded by corrupted information at both the engineering and administrative levels, as well as a lack of emphasis on “civilian institutional improvement.” In its adherence to high modernism, the Myanmar government tried to use data to address the city’s issues without performing the necessary institutional reforms. 

Mandalay is just one recent example of a long history of flawed social engineering schemes. The 1950s project of Chandigarh, for example, proved to be another one of architect Le Corbusier’s failed experiments in high modernism. According to Mehak Sidhu of the National Law School of India University, Le Corbusier treated the city as a blank slate, failing to consider its socio-economic reality and disregarding “local aspirations” in favor of an idealized vision for human development. 

But what if we had better sensors, better data, and better algorithms? Technocrats may believe that examining historical patterns is irrelevant given today’s rapidly advancing technology. They would fail to realize, however, that the issue in Myanmar, Chandigarh, and other cities was not the limitations of their technology, but the limitations of their institutions. Granting Myanmar perfect information about its cities would not change the fact that the government ignored institutional reform, nor does it make the state less authoritarian. And of course, perfect information is only a dream, as writer Adam Greenfield points out in “Against the Smart City.” He argues that the “surrender of municipal management to an algorithmic toolset” is dangerous not only because it grants power to unelected, unregulated entities, but also because it places faith in flawed representations of urban issues. Reality is disorganized and often chaotic – efforts to render it systematic can easily lead to distortion. 

Can we build smart cities without succumbing to a top-down, high modernist philosophy? Without giving undue power to allegedly unbiased, dispassionate technologies? An alternate seems to exist within the “living lab,” a place-based model for research that rigorously depends on co-production between users and information technology. Pioneers of this concept, such as MIT’s Office of Sustainability, believe that it provides a more transparent, concrete, and community-focused platform for addressing social challenges. In smart cities, these labs would take advantage of sensors and other digital infrastructure to develop technological solutions on a smaller scale, working more directly with end-users. The ethical implications of living labs, however, remain unclear. 

A paper titled “Living labs and vacancy in the neoliberal city” argues that these initiatives, despite advertising a uniquely participatory system, are a form of civic paternalism – technocratic elites intervening on behalf of local citizens. While more transparent than corporate and state-managed programs, like those in Mandalay, living labs run the risk of becoming just another form of urban entrepreneurship and a driver of gentrification. In San Francisco, for example, such “open innovation” systems are creating “new forms of exclusionary redevelopment,” according to Dr. Stehlin at UC Berkeley. These initiatives, while attempting to be citizen-led, are liable to benefit an external middle class, rather than the locals themselves. 

All said, living labs do point toward a potential avenue for rectifying the smart city narrative. To overcome the hypocrisy and contradictions of “tech for social good,” it is imperative that we shift data-centric urban planning away from consumerism, surveillance, and convenience. We must democratize and demystify the digital landscape, making it a truly bottom-up antithesis to high modernism. Just as there is no linear path to solving urban issues, there is no clear, easy way to make this shift. 

At minimum, we must adopt framework principles like those found in “The Smart Enough City” by Ben Green, such as using data science to “address social needs and advance policy, rather than adapting goals and values to align with technology.” For new frameworks to succeed, technology creators need to participate and break the barrier of expertise. As the next generation of data science practitioners and engineers, we are in a position to shift the smart city narrative. But to do so requires a genuine commitment to the human contexts of data. It means speaking out against governments, employers, and institutions. It means collaborating with community organizers, activists, and the working class to protest harmful, exploitative, and superficial “solutions.” 

As students, we possess the intellectual capital that can make or break the future of our cities. Let’s put it to good use.


## References

Cardullo, K. R. (2018). Living labs and vacancy in the neoliberal city. Cities(73), 44-50. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S026427511730330X
Green, B. (2019). Lessons from the Past and a Framework for the Future. In B. Green, The Smart Enough City. MIT Press. https://smartenoughcity.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/olgoe4s8/release/1
Greenfield, A. (2013). Against the Smart City. Urban Omnibus. https://urbanomnibus.net/2013/10/against-the-smart-city/
MIT. (n.d.). Defining Living Labs. Retrieved from MIT Office of Sustainability: https://sustainability.mit.edu/defining-living-labs
Ryan-Mosley, T. (2022). A new map of NYC’s cameras shows more surveillance in Black and brown neighborhoods. MIT Technology Review. https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/02/14/1045333/map-nyc-cameras-surveillance-bias-facial-recognition/
Sanchez, J. (2020). Blinded like a state? Urban sanitation, improvement and high modernism in contemporary Myanmar. Political Geography. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0962629820303188
Sidhu, M. (2020). Understanding the Project of Chandigarh: A Reflection on High-Modernist Thinking. Lokniti - MPP Student Blog. https://mpp.nls.ac.in/blog/understanding-the-project-of-chandigarh-a-reflection-on-high-modernist-thinking/
Stehlin, J. (2015). The Post-Industrial “Shop Floor": Emerging Forms of Gentrification in San Francisco's Innovation Economy. Antipode. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282844840_The_Post-Industrial_Shop_Floor_Emerging_Forms_of_Gentrification_in_San_Francisco%27s_Innovation_Economy
